The heart of Scrum is a Sprint, a time-box of one month or less during which a “Done”, useable, and potentially 
releasable product Increment is created. Sprints have consistent durations throughout a development effort. 
A new Sprint starts immediately after the conclusion of the previous Sprint. 

Sprints contain and consist of the Sprint Planning, Daily Scrums, the development work, the Sprint Review, and the Sprint Retrospective. 

During the Sprint: 
• No changes are made that would endanger the Sprint Goal; 
• Quality goals do not decrease; and, 
• Scope may be clarified and re-negotiated between the Product Owner and Development Team as more is learned. 

Each Sprint may be considered a project with no more than a one-month horizon. Like projects, Sprints are used 
to accomplish something. Each Sprint has a goal of what is to be built, a design and flexible plan that will 
guide building it, the work, and the resultant product increment. 

Sprints are limited to one calendar month. When a Sprint’s horizon is too long the definition of what is being 
built may change, complexity may rise, and risk may increase. Sprints enable predictability by ensuring 
inspection and adaptation of progress toward a Sprint Goal at least every calendar month. Sprints also limit 
risk to one calendar month of cost. 

Cancelling a Sprint 
A Sprint can be cancelled before the Sprint time-box is over. Only the Product Owner has the authority to cancel 
the Sprint, although he or she may do so under influence from the stakeholders, the Development Team, or the Scrum Master. 

A Sprint would be cancelled if the Sprint Goal becomes obsolete. This might occur if the company changes 
direction or if market or technology conditions change. In general, a Sprint should be cancelled if it no 
longer makes sense given the circumstances. But, due to the short duration of Sprints, cancellation rarely 
makes sense. 

When a Sprint is cancelled, any completed and “Done” Product Backlog items are reviewed. If part of the work 
is potentially releasable, the Product Owner typically accepts it. All incomplete Product Backlog Items are 
re-estimated and put back on the Product Backlog. The work done on them depreciates quickly and must be 
frequently re-estimated. 

Sprint cancellations consume resources, since everyone regroups in another Sprint Planning to start another 
Sprint. Sprint cancellations are often traumatic to the Scrum Team, and are very uncommon. Sprint Planning 

Sprint Planning. 
The work to be performed in the Sprint is planned at the Sprint Planning.  This plan is created by the 
collaborative work of the entire Scrum Team. 

Sprint Planning is time-boxed to a maximum of eight hours for a one-month Sprint. For shorter Sprints, the 
event is usually shorter. The Scrum Master ensures that the event takes place and that attendants understand 
its purpose. The Scrum Master teaches the Scrum Team to keep it within the time-box. 

Sprint Planning answers the following: 
• What can be delivered in the Increment resulting from the upcoming Sprint? 
• How will the work needed to deliver the Increment be achieved? 

Topic One: What can be done this Sprint? 
The Development Team works to forecast the functionality that will be developed during the Sprint. The Product 
Owner discusses the objective that the Sprint should achieve and the Product Backlog items that, if completed 
in the Sprint, would achieve the Sprint Goal. The entire Scrum Team collaborates on understanding the work of 
the Sprint. 

The input to this meeting is the Product Backlog, the latest product Increment, projected capacity of the 
Development Team during the Sprint, and past performance of the Development Team. The number of items selected 
from the Product Backlog for the Sprint is solely up to the Development Team. Only the Development Team can 
assess what it can accomplish over the upcoming Sprint. 

During Sprint Planning the Scrum Team also crafts a Sprint Goal. The Sprint Goal is an objective that will be 
met within the Sprint through the implementation of the Product Backlog, and it provides guidance to the 
Development Team on why it is building the Increment. 

Topic Two: How will the chosen work get done? 
Having set the Sprint Goal and selected the Product Backlog items for the Sprint, the Development Team decides 
how it will build this functionality into a “Done” product Increment during the Sprint. The Product Backlog 
items selected for this Sprint plus the plan for delivering them is called the Sprint Backlog. 

The Development Team usually starts by designing the system and the work needed to convert the Product Backlog 
into a working product Increment. Work may be of varying size, or estimated effort. However, enough work is 
planned during Sprint Planning for the Development Team to forecast what it believes it can do in the upcoming 
Sprint. Work planned for the first days of the Sprint by the Development Team is decomposed by the end of this 
meeting, often to units of one day or less. The Development Team self-organizes to undertake the work in the 
Sprint Backlog, both during Sprint Planning and as needed throughout the Sprint. 

The Product Owner can help to clarify the selected Product Backlog items and make trade-offs. If the Development 
Team determines it has too much or too little work, it may renegotiate the selected Product Backlog items with 
the Product Owner. The Development Team may also invite other people to attend to provide technical or domain advice.

By the end of the Sprint Planning, the Development Team should be able to explain to the Product Owner and Scrum 
Master how it intends to work as a self-organizing team to accomplish the Sprint Goal and create the anticipated 
Increment. 

Sprint Goal 
The Sprint Goal is an objective set for the Sprint that can be met through the implementation of Product Backlog. 
It provides guidance to the Development Team on why it is building the Increment. It is created during the Sprint 
Planning meeting. The Sprint Goal gives the Development Team some flexibility regarding the functionality 
implemented within the Sprint. The selected Product Backlog items deliver one coherent function, which can be the 
Sprint Goal. The Sprint Goal can be any other coherence that causes the Development Team to work together rather 
than on separate initiatives. 

As the Development Team works, it keeps the Sprint Goal in mind. In order to satisfy the Sprint Goal, it implements 
functionality and technology. If the work turns out to be different than the Development Team expected, they 
collaborate with the Product Owner to negotiate the scope of Sprint Backlog within the Sprint.

